it's march and light
returns of the high arctic sweeping away
four months of darkness
a polar bear stirs she has been in her
den the whole winter
her emergence marks the beginning of
spring
after months of confinement underground
she toboggans down the slope
perhaps to clean her fur perhaps
for sheer joy
[Music]
her cubs gaze out of their bright new
world
for the very first time
the female calls them but this steep
slope is not the easiest place
to take your first steps
but they are hungry and eager to reach
their mother
who's delayed feeding them on this
special day
now she lures them with the promise of
milk the only food the cubs have known
since they were born
deaf and blind beneath the snow some two
months ago
their mother has not eaten for five
months
and has lost half her body weight
now she converts the last of her fat
reserves into milk
for her cups
[Music]
the spring sun brings warmth but also
a problem for the mother it starts to
melt
the sea ice that is where she hunts for
the seal she needs
to feed her cubs and she must get there
before the ice breaks up
for now though it's still minus 30
degrees
and the cubs must have the shelter of
the den
a male red sided garter snake
he survived the winter by hibernating
underground
where the temperature never dropped
below zero
the weak sun persuades more males to
emerge
they're cold and can't move fast yet
they
are in an urgent race the first males to
warm up
will have a head start when the first
females appear
meltwater provides the first drink
they've had for six months
at last a female has emerged
the warmest males will inevitably be the
first to react
to her smell she will only mate once
so competition between them is intense
this male has overslept
he will need hours to warm up at the
moment
he stands no chance of mating
most of the other males are ready to
chase females but
curiously some leave the race and go
to join the cold mail
[Music]
they slide their warm bodies over him
just as they would
if they were courting a female
more and more males crowd around him
why
their relative temperatures show what's
going on
his cool body showing as blue is quickly
warming
as it absorbs heat from the other males
he's a trickster he's fooled the others
by giving off a scent
just like a females and they are trying
to mate with him
he only needs a few minutes of this to
steal enough heat from his rivals
to catch up and join the chase
every spring tens of thousands of garter
snakes
fight it out in this mating frenzy
it is in numbers the greatest gathering
of reptiles
in the world
and it seems that our male from the
camera trap has picked up ascent
and found himself a female
due to his small size this male wouldn't
normally have a chance to mate
this female seems impatient and our male
doesn't have to be asked twice
his small size causes a few logistical
problems
but with persistence and the odd leg up
finally he succeeds
[Music]
mating over the female grooms the young
male
with no yearlings around she can afford
to spend time with her man
[Music]
spring climbs the mountains
hibernation isn't something an animal
just wakes up from
even after surviving here for seven
months
if the transition from oblivion to
action isn't exactly right
the marmot could die it needs what's
left of its fat stores to heat its heart
and blood
the warmed heart beats faster
[Music]
the warmed blood flows first to the
critical areas
and then to the whole body
it's a quick system but it takes almost
all of what's left of the marmot's
energy
if it takes more than what's left the
marmot
never wakes up
[Music]
half the youngsters don't wake up but
most of the adults do
their bodies around a third lighter than
when winter began
they're ravenously hungry but they
hardly eat for at least a week
the time it takes to rebuild their gut
lining
and because they use so much energy just
waking up
some don't last that week
awake and amid the spring vegetation
they starve because there are so few
vancouver island marmots
every survivor is important for the
species
understanding how hibernation works is
important too
it may help save them
every spring the male alligators put on
a spectacular mating display
they sink down in the water so their
backs are just below the surface
and make really low frequency sounds
and the consequence of that is that
water droplets on their back
look like they're dancing
and it soon becomes a water dance-off
as rival males compete by displaying to
females
i've never really had any desire to be
close to a bellowing alligator
but i do want to see this and to do it
i've got to trigger a chorus of amorous
alligators
to see this spectacle helen needs to
encourage some alligators to start
dancing
and to do this she needs to replicate
their infrasonic calls
so they think there's a larger male
close by
and that requires speakers even bigger
than a campervan
these speakers produce sounds of 19
hertz
the same deep frequency as the
alligators bellow
so let's see if they can entice a grumpy
alligator
to start flirting
so that's it those are the big
infrasound speakers
sending sound out over the lake here and
now we just have to wait and see if any
of the alligators react
[Music]
straight over there's tail up in the air
getting ready to call
there are two parts to this display
[Music]
a deep bellow from their mouths
it's like hearing dinosaurs
and the water dance
although we can't hear it these
alligators are actually producing a very
low frequency hum
and this causes water droplets to bounce
off their backs
for these ancient predators this
elaborate display
is essential for attracting mates
[Music]
[Applause]
but how do they make the water dance
just
using sound
[Music]
footage from our high-speed camera
reveals their secret
the alligator's back is just below the
surface of the water
as it begins to bellow its entire body
vibrates
and its back acts like a piston driving
the surface of the water
into a dramatic splashing display
[Music]
it's thought that alligators have been
calling like this for at least 70
million years
one such place is the sea of okut in far
eastern russia
this is the island of thalam
throughout the long arctic winter it's
encircled by ice
but as spring approaches that begins to
break up
and sea birds that have spent the winter
feeding out on the open ocean far to the
south begin to return
its isolated position and steep cliffs
make talon a perfect nesting site
the tufted puffins arrive first these
are the pacific cousins of our less
spectacular
atlantic species
horned puffins soon follow
in all 14 different species return to
talon each spring
and in just a few weeks the once silent
cliffs
come alive to the cause of 4 million
breeding sea birds
this is a multi-story avian city
[Music]
assembling in these dense colonies after
having spent a largely solitary life at
sea
provides the birds with the social
stimulation that is the key to
coordinating their breeding
by nesting and laying together they
ensure that most of their chicks will
leave the nest at exactly the same time
just like the turtles this is the way
they spread the impact of predators
the world's largest eagle stella's sea
eagle
a third as big again as a golden
[Music]
throughout the summer the eagles hunt in
thailand's crowded colonies
riding on the updrafts they patrol the
top of the cliffs
looking out for any kitty wake that
ventures too far from the rock face
suddenly the huge eagle stoops with the
aerial agility of a falcon
coordinating panic among the kitty wakes
confuses their attacker
[Music]
but the eagle doesn't give up
and it has got one
[Music]
catching insects one by one takes a lot
of time
and a lot of energy and very few
creatures that feed that way
can get enough to build and sustain big
bodies
but some insect eaters early in their
history about 40 million years ago
solved that problem by broadening their
diet
and one of their descendants lives right
here
in my garden in london and i can tempt
it out
with a wide variety of food including
for example
minced meat
the hedgehog is still very much a
creature of the night
but it's too big to hide in the leaf
litter
that makes it vulnerable to attack from
animals like foxes
to make up for this its hairs have
become a cloak of prickles
and if it thinks it's in real danger
it's got a special trick
the hedgehog will stay an impregnable
spiny ball like this
until it decides that danger has passed
but one thing is guaranteed to make a
male hedgehog drop his guard
the promise of an amorous liaison
if you're outside on a spring evening
you may be lucky enough to witness
an extraordinary sight
[Music]
you might think that having a coat of
spines on your back would be something
of a handicap
when it comes to the intimacies of
courtship
and indeed classical naturalists thought
that
hedgehogs actually mated belly to belly
the male noses the female spines which
seems to excite her
although as far as he's concerned it
does look
rather painful
whether the female flattens her prickles
to help the male
is unclear but it does seem that the old
joke that asks
how do hedgehog's mate was right all
along
the answer is of course with great care
[Music]
[Applause]
so
even though only one percent of the
original pine forest remains
writer jim crumley can still feel
humbled in its presence
pine woods are i mean to my way of
thinking
are completely different from any other
kind of wood
especially a big pine which like you get
around the cairngorms where you do get
the chance to
you know go for a long walk in in trees
and there is a sense at the beginning of
as you enter the pinewood that it sort
of says to me
walk more slowly you walk softer
look at where you are and take notice
sheltered in the woods from the fickle
weather jim can easily lose sense of
time
under a tree like this he had his first
encounter with one of the rarest and
shyest creatures of the pine forest
i was lying just on the ground and i
probably hadn't been in a deep sleep
but i've been dozing and there was a
scrapper kelly and making this
preposterous noise
and it just started to
literally parade up and down and this
strange kind of
popping cork noises started and it was
extraordinary to
encounter for the first time in such a
situation
or capers are only found in pine forests
where they feed on the pine needles and
shoots
it's in april when the males head
towards the special
place in the forest known as a lek a
northward
for dance
[Music]
i kind of followed it as best i could
crawling on my stomach
and got to the edge of the slow clearing
and there were three or four others
there
it was into this big black fan thing
it's like a black sunrise
it's one of the most extraordinary
things in nature
the objective exercise obviously is to
attract the females
and that whole thing that kind of joy of
discovery thing
is what absolutely for me underpins um
everything they'll do in the natural
world
it was a rare moment indeed there is so
little native forest there are fewer
than 2 000 kappa kali left
reluctantly the chicks take a few
nervous steps
towards the edge
[Music]
encouraged by a gentle nudge
he leaps into the unknown
dad follows right behind him
reassuringly calling
to his chick
made it
[Music]
so
the landings may not be stylish but at
least
they're on target
it's easy to misjudge the distance and
some fall short of the water but even
now
dad sticks close by
he encourages his chick to take the last
few steps
towards the safety of the waves
but some chicks land a long way from the
water
they're sturdy enough to survive the
fall
but this is no place to be left alone
for the mother fox it's easy pickings
with so many free meals falling from the
sky
she runs from one kill to the next
the chicks will be jumping for only
three days
so she must make the most of this
bonanza
the survival of her own family depends
on it
[Music]
with more chicks than she can possibly
carry
the mother fox has to be clever
what her family can't eat now she buries
for the days ahead she'll have a
well-stocked lada
enough for all eight of her cubs
[Music]
you